## Measuring Education

The COVID-19 pandemic has led to drastic changes in almost every part of life for everyone around the world. As a student, one of the most significant changes that can be seen is in education. In places such as the United States, many inequalities have been brought into brighter light by the pandemic, especially when it comes to access to remote learning and an environment that is conducive to learning. However, in developing countries, these inequalities are likely to be even more severe. Some of the main indicators of inequality are wealth, geographic location, and gender. It is essential that children in developing countries are given opportunities to access an education, but in the midst of a disruption like the COVID-19 pandemic, these disruptions can often be difficult to identify and measure.

COVID-19 is not the only public health emergency that has occurred in recent years. Ebola was another pandemic that had drastic implications for the interruption of education. Liberia is one of the countries that was impacted by the Ebola outbreak from 2013-2016 and is currently impacted by COVID-19, while not at as severe a scale as countries such as the United States. Liberia is also a country where gender inequality is a significant issue, adding even more weight to the importance of education as a method of providing girls with a way to improve their opportunities for their futures. 

While census data provides broad information surrounding the issue of access to education, surveys such as the Demographic and Health Survey (DHS) provide data that is collected more frequently. However, as the Ebola outbreak and the COVID-19 pandemic have demonstrated, changes in the circumstances of countries can change much more rapidly than a survey conducted every 5 years can account for. It is therefore essential to develop and utilize technologies to predict variables such as access to education within a frictionless pathway. 

In order to have the most up-to-date data possible, data science classification methods could be used to predict variables such as the level of education based on a few variables such as age, gender, and wealth. If fewer variables must be physically updated and others can be accurately predicted based on these measurements, then it is possible that much more accurate data can be available in the time between DHS years. Methods of data collection such as mobile phone or satellite data may even be able to aid in this more limited data collection process. With this updated data, aid organizations and governments can better target areas where financial or physical aid can be directed. 
