# Gender and Education in the Midst of a Changing World: Analyzing Data to Assess Inequalities in Liberia

Introduction

For many students in the United States, complaining about going to school seems to be a natural part of attending. Some do not want to do the work, others are stressed by the social element of the setting, and some become anxious about living up to expectations about their performance. Others just feed off of the energy of other students who claim they do not want to be in school. However, in many countries, going to school is a privilege that a large number of students are not able to enjoy. Many children are faced with the decision to sacrifice their education in order to put food on the table and help their families (TEDx Talks, 2020).  This privilege of receiving an education is even more difficult for girls to obtain. Girls are often expected to stay at home and care for the family, or the school funds are spent only on boys if the family can afford to send their children to school at all (Gates, 2019, p. 100). As Gates (2019) shares in her book The Moment of Lift, “sending girls to school is a long term investment, and for families in extreme poverty, the focus is on survival” (p. 100) or the traditional role of girls in the home doesn’t require them to get an education (p. 101). 

In an attempt to remedy these unfreedoms for students and females, member states of the United Nations adopted the 17 Sustainable Development Goals in 2015 as a call to action to end poverty by “improv[ing] health and education, reduc[ing] inequality, and spur[ring] economic growth” (United Nations). Sustainable Development Goal 4 specifically focuses on providing access to quality education for students, and Sustainable Development Goal 5 aims to achieve global gender equality (United Nations). In many ways, these goals go hand in hand, with education providing girls with a way to improve their position in society and movements toward gender equality increasing the number of girls who are in school. However, the progress towards achieving these goals has faced severe setbacks in the past year and a half. 

In March of 2020, the world appeared to shut down. The COVID-19 pandemic caused many aspects of daily life to come to a halt, including school. By April 2020, school closures reached their peak and 1.725 billion children were affected globally when 95% of countries around the world closed their schools at some capacity (Smith, 2021). While all of these students were severely affected, students without access to network, internet, or computers suffered even more without access to virtual learning (Dube, 2020). 

Liberia is one country where these conditions have occurred. As one of the top ten poorest countries in Africa and among the poorest countries in the world, lack of access to education and gender inequality are severe, without sufficient resources available to address the inequalities (World Population Review, 2021). According to the Human Development Report from 2020, Liberia ranked 175th for the human development index and 156th for the gender inequality index, placing it in the “low human development" category (UNDP, 2020). This means that there is still a lot of work to be done to improve the conditions of gender equality in Liberia and one of the best ways to do this is through education.

In addition to being affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, Liberia was also one of the three main countries, along with Gambia and Sierra Leone, to be affected by the Ebola pandemic from 2014-2016 (Parry & Gordon, 2021). Not only did this affect students who were out of school while it was closed, but many students did not return to school once it opened again (Smith, 2021). Girls were particularly affected as many got married and began having children, some earlier than expected, due to the disruption in their education (Watt, 2020). This phenomena is present in other countries as well. If a girl leaves school, there is a high likelihood of her getting married soon after she drops out. The opposite can also happen when a girl plans to get married and therefore drops out of school to fulfill her roles as a wife and mother (Sekine & Hodgkin, 2017). 

These complex issues of gender inequality and freedom to access education require measurement and analysis in order to be certain that proper actions are being taken to attempt to remedy them. The Demographic and Health Survey (DHS) is a survey conducted by USAID in many countries, including Liberia. The survey conducted in Liberia approximately every five years is known as the Liberia Demographic and Health Survey (LDHS) and “is designed to provide data for monitoring the population and health situation in Liberia” (Liberia, 2021a). When compared to census data, which is only collected every ten years, DHS data is much more accurate. However, it is not a perfect solution to the need for accurate, up-to-date, easy to access data. It is essential to be able to quickly and easily analyze this data to target the specific regions and people who require aid. 

Gender in Liberia 

When analyzing the level of development in a country, looking at the conditions of gender equality is a central point of investigation. Not only does gender inequality impede the progress toward improved lives for women, but “if you want to lift up humanity, [you must] empower women” (p. 27) as this empowerment “is the most comprehensive, pervasive, high-leverage investment you can make in human beings” (Gates, 2019, p. 27). In the argument for gender equality, it is essential that people realize that it is a battle for improved lives for everyone, not just women. One example of an area of life where the lack of female empowerment is evident is the fact that, even in developed countries, “women are more likely to spend more time on child care”  and around the world females do “three times more unpaid work than men” (Morse & Anderson, 2020). Many times, this unpaid work is in addition to work done for pay outside of the home. When this happens, women are less able to care for themselves and lack the influence to change their social positions since there is no extra time in their daily lives for anything other than work in the home. While this may be how many women want to live their lives, it is crucial that other opportunities are available to them, especially the opportunity to go to school and receive an education.

Analyzing access to education is a primary method of measuring gender equality since “education is a vital step on the path to empowerment for women” (Gates, 2019, p. 89). When looking specifically at Liberia, 31% of women in the survey group of the LDHS, ages 15-49, did not have any education. On the other hand, only 13% of the men had no education in Liberia (Liberia, 2021b). While this is still a high percentage of men who have no education, it is still less than half of the number of women who have no education. Furthermore, 13% more men have attended junior and or senior high school, with “40% of women hav[ing] reached junior or senior high compared with 53% of men” (Liberia, 2021b). Finally, an even more general statistic can be viewed in terms of the percent of the population that is literate. Only 52% of women in Liberia are literate while 75% of men are literate (Liberia, 2021b). Even if this literacy is achieved through informal education, it still reveals the significant disparity between the education levels of females and males in the country.

Without an education, it is more difficult for women to get jobs, girls are more likely to get married earlier if they drop out, and they have less knowledge about how to gain power and influence over their household or within their community. This influence also aids them in having the power to control other aspects of their lives, including their finances, their political ideas, or how many children they have. For example, in Liberia, women with more education have 2 children on average while women with no education have an average of 5.3 children (Liberia, 2021b). While some women may want to have many children, for many it is a physical, financial, and emotional struggle when they have no control over their pregnancies. When women aren’t educated, they are also more likely to have children earlier since they most often get married soon after leaving school. The Liberia DHS found that 47% of females age 15-19 have started having children when they have no education, while only 20% of females in this age group who have attended secondary school have begun childbearing (Liberia, 2021b). In close relation to these statistics is the fact that women with no education have a much lower rate of use of modern family planning methods (Liberia, 2021b). The LDHS also found that children of mothers with an education are more likely to live past their fifth birthday (Liberia, 2021b). 

All of these factors point to the overall health and wellbeing of women and their children in Liberia and the way that education seems to have a strong correlation with these factors. As the world has experienced in the past year and a half, the COVID-19 pandemic has peeled back the layers of these correlations and revealed that certain groups are much more susceptible to the effects of the pandemic. Women and girls are very clearly one of these groups. Even before COVID-19, Liberia experienced one of the most severe outbreaks of Ebola in the pandemic from 2014 to 2016, compounding an already complex issue of health, inequality, and gender.

Ebola and Covid-19

Over the course of the Ebola pandemic from 2014-2016, over 11,000 people died from the disease (Nasa, 2019). The three countries that were primarily impacted were Liberia, Gambia, and Sierra Leone in Western Africa. Not only did this outbreak have a significant cost in relation to lives lost, it also “devastated the economy” and the economies of these countries were still in recovery when COVID-19 hit (Nasa, 2019). The impact on education was also substantial, with 5 million children leaving “school for up to nine months” (Watt, 2020) during the outbreak. Most schools ended up reopening in 2015, but by that time, “students had lost approximately 1,848 hours of education” (Watt, 2020) or more than 33 weeks of time in school . However, the most significant point of these statistics is the fact that, of the children who had to leave school, “many never went back” (Watt, 2020). From other information describing the state of education for girls, it would not be unreasonable to deduce that girls will most likely be the ones to not return since they are less likely to go to school in the first place.

When this is viewed from the perspective that many of the female children who do not return to school will be forced into marriage and become pregnant or any of the children may be forced into child labor, the importance of targeting these children for aid becomes even clearer (Watt, 2020). This is especially true since so many children are already not in school or only completing primary school. One of the many reasons it is so important for children to receive an education is that it is often a strong predictor of wealth and this wealth is also a predictor of health and access to healthcare (Gates, 2019, p. 26). 
In the midst of a pandemic, this combination of advantages is essential for the survival of people in countries such as Liberia. However, since girls are less likely to be in school, and are also more likely to not return to school as the result of getting married and having children, they are likely to suffer even more from a lack of these benefits. The severity of the possible results of not receiving more years of education highlights how important it is to analyze the effect of events like the Ebola pandemic. 

With only a few years between the end of the Ebola pandemic and the COVID-19 pandemic, there has been little time for the countries that were hit the hardest to recover. Earlier in the pandemic, it was observed that number of cases and the case-fatality ratio are lower in Africa than other areas of the world (Soy, 2020). As of August 2020, Africa had fewer cases than Asia, Europe, and the Americas (Chitungo et al., 2020). The lower number of cases was attributed to both negative factors such as limited testing and poor health systems that were underreporting cases and the positive factor that systems put in place from previous disease outbreaks, such as Ebola and HIV, have provided a framework for combating the disease (Chitungo et al., 2020). However, in the third wave of the virus that occurred in Africa over the month of July, 2021, cases are increasing dramatically along with the death rate. The average death rate in Africa is 2.6% while the global average is 2.2% (Mwai, 2021). Part of this could be due to the fact that only 2% of the population of Africa is fully vaccinated (Mwai, 2021). While the total number of cases and deaths in Africa is lower than other continents, these statistics are still worrying and demonstrate the inability of countries such as Liberia to effectively combat the pandemic (European, 2021).

The increasing severity of the pandemic in Africa, including in Liberia raises concern about the wider social effects of such drastic changes to daily life. As with previous outbreaks, the pandemic has caused girls and women to assume the responsibilities of “full-time childcare and homeschooling, tasks that generally get assigned to a household’s girls and women, while also serving as the caregivers for the sick and elderly in the house” (Morse & Anderson, 2020). With these changes in roles, or sometimes a return to previous roles the women had moved on from, it is likely that girls will just remain at home or they will get married and live with their husband rather than returning to school.
It is important to acknowledge that males still experience the effects of the pandemic, especially rural, poor boys who do not have access to the technology necessary for virtual online school (Dube, 2020). However, gender inequality makes it so that girls are at an even greater risk for loss of their education and with it, many prospects for their futures. The boys cannot be forgotten, but there is a lot of work to do before the playing field is leveled, so girls may need extra assistance for the time being.

Having the data about the changes in students attending school and their roles in the home is essential in order to target a response to get children back in school. It is also important to be able to articulate the relationship between gender, education, and the wealth that can be accumulated through an education and successful job. The best way to do this is with large datasets. It is difficult to affect any real change without first taking in all of the facts. When analyzing data about education and gender, it is especially important to have the most recent data possible since the conditions surrounding the data can change so quickly. While it is necessary to pay particular attention to the data surrounding the education of girls, it is essential that there is data on all students so that boys are not left out of the equation, even though they are more likely to return to school. The DHS is one of the international surveys that completes this task.

DHS and Analysis

As mentioned previously, the DHS is a survey that “provides an opportunity to inform policy and provide data for planning, implementation, and monitoring and evaluation of national health programs” (Liberia, 2021a). These surveys are completed approximately every five years and therefore provide a much more accurate picture of the lives of the people in the country of interest than census data. When collecting the data for the Liberia Demographic Health Survey, the country was divided into enumeration areas with households being selected randomly for a total of 9,745 households to be surveyed and women and men ages 15-49 were eligible for interviews within the households (Liberia, 2021a). Various questionnaires were used in the most recent LDHS, including a household questionnaire which contains information about all the members of the household of interest (Liberia, 2021a). 

While it is an improvement to have these surveys taking place more frequently than a census, which would occur approximately every ten years, they are still not completely accurate and don’t provide all of the information about the country since not every household can be taken into account due to the “systematic sampling of households” (Liberia, 2021a). In addition, the condition of the country can change dramatically between the LDHS that took place in 2013 compared to the 2019-20 LDHS. In that time, the country experienced the Ebola pandemic and so much of the data collected was likely impacted, yet the impacts cannot be isolated since there was a 6 year period of time between the surveys. 

The 2019-20 LDHS is also the most recent Liberian report and one of the most recent DHS reports that has been published for any country, yet it has no data about the COVID-19 pandemic. This is a significant issue. Even though the survey may not specifically address COVID-19 cases or deaths, the impacts that the pandemic has on families, their health, education, and wealth are essential to be able to predict and analyze. Being able to make predictions allows informed decisions to be made about how to continue addressing inequalities that existed before the COVID-19 pandemic and remedy increased inequalities that have emerged as a result of the pandemic. It is not reasonable to expect a survey of this magnitude to be completed again in the next year or two, especially so soon after the last one and in the midst of the continuing pandemic. However, if one or two factors could be measured, such as age, gender, wealth, or education, and then those variables could be utilized to predict a different factor. Informed decisions could then be made with data that could be faster to collect. 

Methods

To explore the idea of the predictive nature of the various variables in the LDHS, a model can be created using the datasets created by the DHS program. If a model can be trained using the complete DHS data that exists, then there is a possibility that this model could be used with a dataset with fewer variables, as long as a strong correlation is found in the investigation of the DHS data. The strength of this approach is that surveyors would not have to collect as much information and could therefore collect it more frequently. Training a model would allow for more accurate analysis to take place without having to complete an entire new survey. 
There is a possibility that, without as much data to gather, a different method of collection could be put in place. For example, satellite data could locate schools and determine their size and use. Mobile phone data is also a growing technology for collecting data. There has been research demonstrating the effectiveness of mobile phone data in determining the gender of the user (Vaitla et al., 2017). Both of these methods would be able to provide much faster access to the data and that could then be used in a model trained on the most recent DHS data.

In order to access and work with the DHS data, a request for the data must be approved and then that data must be processed so that it only has the variables of interest and fits the needs of the analyst. For this investigation, I utilized the data from the Liberia 2019-20 DHS Household Member Survey. After cleaning the data to create a data frame focusing on the variables of interest, I tested different classification methods to see whether it would be possible to accurately predict the education level of a person surveyed based on their age, sex, wealth index, and wealth index score. 

While investigating the data, it could be seen that there was not a strong linear relationship between any of the variables, other than wealth index and wealth index score, so it was clear that classification methods were necessary. Since the highest level of education was measured on a scale of 0-3, 0 meaning the person had no formal education, 1 indicating primary school, 2 indicating secondary school, and 3 indicating higher education, a classification method does make the most sense since the data is being organized into known categories, rather than a continuous scale (Liberia, 2021a). For this investigation, I selected three different classification methods to test: K-nearest neighbors (KNN), logistic regression, and decision trees. Within each of these methods, I tested the original data and scaled data, then I tested each method after completing dimensionality reduction on the data, specifically principal component analysis (PCA) and t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-SNE). For each of these dimensionally reduced tests, I tested the unscaled and scaled data. After these tests, I determined that the KNN classification on the unscaled data had the highest accuracy score, 0.6329, without distance weighting. While many of the other tests using KNN were close to this value along with some of the decision tree accuracy scores, this was the highest. Based on this, it can be determined that KNN classification with unscaled, not dimensionally reduced data would likely be the best method for classification in later research attempting to predict the highest level of education in Liberia.

Further Research

The first goal of further research would be to continue testing further hyperparameters to see whether the accuracy scores can be increased even further to improve later predictions. In addition, there are additional classification methods that, due to time constraints, were not tested in this research. One of the primary methods would be random forests, which, if put simply, are a collection of decision trees. Completing both of these in addition to the completed investigation would solidify which method is the most accurate when using age, sex, wealth index, and wealth index score to predict highest education level. 

It would also be beneficial to test predicting different targets, such as total years of education, since that would be updated more frequently, or predicting gender based on the previously mentioned variables. In doing this, the number of variables that have to be included in future surveys can be significantly reduced, therefore reducing the time required to collect the data and allowing more frequent updates to the dataset.

Although more information can be analyzed through advancing data science methods, the collection of the data is still not efficient. While it is important to be able to analyze the data more efficiently and create models that can be used to make decisions without the most up-to-date data, the collection methods also need to be improved. Mobile phones and satellites are effective ways to collect general data since the collection method is almost a frictionless pathway (Vaitla et al., 2017). Information can easily and quickly be entered or collected, often without the effort of a person physically collecting it. This ability to improve data collection methods will become even more important in the future as another event, be it a pandemic, a natural disaster, or a war, will begin and more up-to-date data will benefit relief and rebuilding efforts. Having more recent information allows even the models to be more accurate in the process of predicting an outcome with limited variables. This process can even be made simpler by improving the predictive abilities of models so that they only require variables that are easier to collect data for.

Generally, there is so much information available and that is required to make informed decisions to improve the living circumstances of people in the world, yet work still needs to be done to collect this information in a thorough, efficient manner.

Conclusion

When actually analyzing the data collected by the LDHS, at such a large scale, the only effective way to analyze this data is through computer analysis. It is not enough to solely look at the tables of data in the report, which is often not a dataset, but rather just totals or percentages of the indicative factor of the survey. More investigations must be completed to see how the DHS data can be used to the greatest advantage of governments and organizations to benefit the people in the countries where the data is being collected.

Unequal treatment of women in their homes and communities and a lack of access to education are severe unfreedoms, especially in developing countries. It is necessary that countries globally continue to work towards the 17 Sustainable Development Goals by the set date in 2030, specifically gender equality and access to educaiton (United Nations). However, there is not a direct, linear path that can be followed to achieve these goals. Crises such as the Ebola pandemic, the COVID-19 pandemic, and other disasters, natural or otherwise, are constant threats to this path of progress. Ebola and COVID-19 have both had severe effects on the education that children have achieved and this will affect the children’s future, especially for girls.  A data science method must be implemented to both improve the predictive abilities of models and to improve the actual collection of the data. 

References

Chitungo, I., Dzobo, M., Hlongwa, M., & Dzinamarira, T. (2020). COVID-19: Unpacking the low number of cases in Africa. Public Health in Practice, 1, 100038. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.puhip.2020.100038

Dube, B. (2020). Rural online learning in the context of COVID 19 in South Africa: Evoking an inclusive education approach. Multidisciplinary Journal of Educational Research, 10(2), 135. https://doi.org/10.17583/remie.2020.5607

European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC). (2021, July 22). COVID-19 situation update worldwide, as of week 28, updated 22 July 2021. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/geographical-distribution-2019-ncov-cases. 

Gates, M. (2019). The Moment of Lift: How Empowering Women Changes the World. Flatiron Books. 

Liberia Institute of Statistics and Geo-Information Services - LISGIS, Minsitry of Health - MOH, and ICF. (2021). Liberia Demographic and Health Survey 2019-20. Monrovia, Liberia: LISGIS/MOH/ICF. https://www.dhsprogram.com/pubs/pdf/FR362/FR362.pdf.

Liberia Institute of Statistics and Geo-Information Services (LISGIS) and ICF. (2021). The Liberia Demographic and Health Survey 2019-20 Summary Report. Monrovia, Liberia, and Rockville, Maryland, USA: LISGIS and ICF. 

Morse, M. M., & Anderson, G. (2020, June 8). How the COVID-19 Crisis is Exacerbating Gender Inequality. unfoundation.org. https://unfoundation.org/blog/post/shadow-pandemic-how-covid19-crisis-exacerbating-gender-inequality/

Mwai, P. (2021, July 16). Coronavirus in Africa: Concern grows over third wave of infections. BBC News. https://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-53181555. 

Nasa, R. (2019, August 13). What the Failures of the Last Ebola Outbreak Can Teach Us About the Future. PBS. https://www.pbs.org/wgbh/frontline/article/what-the-failures-ebola-outbreak-teach-future/. 

Parry, B. R., & Gordon, E. (2021). The shadow pandemic: Inequitable gendered impacts of COVID‐19 in South Africa. Gender, Work & Organization, 28(2), 795–806. https://doi.org/10.1111/gwao.12565

Sekine, K., & Hodgkin, M. E. (2017). Effect of child marriage on girls' school dropout in Nepal: Analysis of data from the Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey 2014. PloS One, 12(7), e0180176. 10.1371/journal.pone.0180176

Smith, W. C. (2021). Consequences of school closure on access to education: Lessons from the 2013–2016 Ebola pandemic. International Review of Education, 67(1–2), 53–78. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11159-021-09900-2

Soy, A. (2020, October 7). Coronavirus in Africa: Five reasons why Covid-19 has been less deadly than elsewhere. BBC News. https://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-54418613. 

TEDx Talks. (2020, May 19). Education in Africa | Lennox Owino | TEDxUWMadison [Video]. YouTube. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lejhIcRh8js

UNDP (Ed.). (2020). The next frontier: Human development and the Anthropocene. United Nations Development Programme.

United Nations. (n.d.). THE 17 GOALS | Sustainable Development. United Nations. https://sdgs.un.org/goals. 

Vaitla, B., Bosco, C., Alegana, V., Bird, T., Pezzulo, C., Hornby, G., Sorichetta, A., Steele, J., Ruktanonchai, C., Ruktanonchai, N., Wetter, E., Bengtsson, L., Tatem, A. J., Di Clemente R., Luengo-Oroz, M., González, M. C., Nielsen, R., Baar, O., Vacarelu, F., […] Wouter, E. (2017). Big data and the well-being of women and girls.” Data2X. Retrieved from https://www.openaire.eu/search/publication?articleId=od_______348::84be43eb9164d5fbf098d9504feeb57d

Watt, E. (2020, April 2). From Ebola to coronavirus: education must not be forgotten in a health crisis. Theirworld. https://theirworld.org/news/ebola-to-coronavirus-education-vital-in-health-crisis

World Population Review. (2021). Poorest Countries in Africa 2021. Poorest Countries In Africa 2021. https://worldpopulationreview.com/country-rankings/poorest-countries-in-africa. 

